docs/usage/sc_AIRRseq/single_cell_tutorial.md, before:

# nf-core/airrflow: Single-cell tutorial

This tutorial provides a step by step introduction on how to run nf-core/airrflow on single-cell BCR-seq data or single-cell TCR-seq data.

## Pre-requisites

> [!INSTALLATION]
> If you are new to Nextflow and nf-core, please refer to [this page](https://nf-co.re/docs/usage/installation) on how to set up Nextflow and a container engine needed to run this pipeline. At the moment, nf-core/airrflow does NOT support using conda virtual environments for dependency management, only containers are supported. Make sure to [test your setup](https://nf-co.re/docs/usage/introduction#how-to-run-a-pipeline) with `-profile test` before running the workflow on actual data.

For the purpose of running this tutorial on your local machine, we recommend a docker installation.

To install docker, follow the instructions [here](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/). After installation on linux, don't forget to check the [post-installation steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/).

## Testing the pipeline with built-in tests

Once you have set up your Nextflow and container (docker or singularity). Test the airrflow pipeline with built-in tests. 

```bash
nextflow run nf-core/airrflow -r 4.2.0 -profile test,docker --outdir test_results
```


## Running airrflow pipeline
There are two acceptable input formats for airrflow single-cell AIRRseq pipeline: AIRR rearrangement or fastq format. 

For this tutorial we will practice on both of the input formats. 

## AIRR rearrangement format
### Datasets

For this tutorial we will use subsampled PBMC single-cell BCR sequencing data from two subjects, before (d0) and after flu vaccination (d12). The dataset is available on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.11373740). You don't need to downlaod the samples bacause the link is already in the samplesheet. 

### Preparing samplesheet and configuration file

To run the pipeline one needs to prepare a samplesheet and configuration file. 

Ready samplesheet for this tutorial is [here](sample_data_code/assembled_samplesheet.tsv).
Ready configuration file is [here](sample_data_code/resource.config). 
Download these two files to the directory where you will run the airrflow pipeline. 

### Running airrflow 

With all the files prepared, now you are ready to run the airrflow pipeline. 

```bash
nextflow run nf-core/airrflow -r 4.2.0 \
-profile docker \
--mode assembled \
--input assembled_samplesheet.tsv \
--outdir sc_from_assembled_results  \
-c resource.config
```
Of course you can wrap all your code in a bash file. We prepared one for you and it's available [here](sample_data_code/airrflow_sc_from_assembled.sh).
With the bash file, it's easy to run the pipeline with a single-line command. 

```bash
bash airrflow_sc_from_assembled.sh
```


## fastq format
### Datasets

### Preparing samplesheet, gene reference and configuration file

### Running airrflow


## Understanding the results

Explanation of the analysis steps of the pipeline and where to find the results. Point to output documentation for specific steps if necessary.

## Including lineage tree computation

Re-run with --lineage_tree parameter using -resume as example.

## Downstream analysis

Downstream analysis can be performed from the AIRR repertoires. Provide one example and links to the Immcantation single-cell tutorial.

Commit message:

added steps on running pipeline from 10x fastq files.

docs/usage/sc_AIRRseq/single_cell_tutorial.md, after:

# nf-core/airrflow: Single-cell tutorial

This tutorial provides a step by step introduction on how to run nf-core/airrflow on single-cell BCR-seq data or single-cell TCR-seq data.

## Pre-requisites

> [!INSTALLATION]
> If you are new to Nextflow and nf-core, please refer to [this page](https://nf-co.re/docs/usage/installation) on how to set up Nextflow and a container engine needed to run this pipeline. At the moment, nf-core/airrflow does NOT support using conda virtual environments for dependency management, only containers are supported. Make sure to [test your setup](https://nf-co.re/docs/usage/introduction#how-to-run-a-pipeline) with `-profile test` before running the workflow on actual data.

For the purpose of running this tutorial on your local machine, we recommend a docker installation.

To install docker, follow the instructions [here](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/). After installation on linux, don't forget to check the [post-installation steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/).

## Testing the pipeline with built-in tests

Once you have set up your Nextflow and container (docker or singularity). Test the airrflow pipeline with built-in tests. 

```bash
nextflow run nf-core/airrflow -r 4.2.0 -profile test,docker --outdir test_results
```


## Running airrflow pipeline
There are two acceptable input formats for airrflow single-cell AIRRseq pipeline: AIRR rearrangement or fastq format. 

For this tutorial we will practice on both of the input formats. 

## AIRR rearrangement format
### Datasets

For this tutorial we will use subsampled PBMC single-cell BCR sequencing data from two subjects, before (d0) and after flu vaccination (d12). The dataset is available on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.11373740). You don't need to downlaod the samples bacause the link is already in the samplesheet. 

### Preparing samplesheet and configuration file

To run the pipeline one needs to prepare a samplesheet and configuration file. 

Ready samplesheet for this tutorial is [here](sample_data_code/assembled_samplesheet.tsv).
Ready configuration file is [here](sample_data_code/resource.config). 
Download these two files to the directory where you will run the airrflow pipeline. 

### Running airrflow 

With all the files prepared, now you are ready to run the airrflow pipeline. 

```bash
nextflow run nf-core/airrflow -r 4.2.0 \
-profile docker \
--mode assembled \
--input assembled_samplesheet.tsv \
--outdir sc_from_assembled_results  \
-c resource.config
```
Of course you can wrap all your code in a bash file. We prepared one for you and it's available [here](sample_data_code/airrflow_sc_from_assembled.sh).
With the bash file, it's easy to run the pipeline with a single-line command. 

```bash
bash airrflow_sc_from_assembled.sh
```


## Fastq format
### Datasets
For this tutorial we will use subsampled blood single-cell TCR sequencing data of one subject generated with the 10x Genomic platform. The data is provided in the samplesheet. 

### Preparing samplesheet, gene reference and configuration file
To run the airrflow pipeline on single cell TCR or BCR sequencing data from fastq files, we need to prepare samplesheet, gene reference and configuration file in advance. 

Ready samplesheet for this tutorial is [here](sample_data_code/10x_sc_raw.tsv). Ready configuration file is [here](sample_data_code/resource.config). Download these two files to the directory where you will run the airrflow pipeline.

Gene reference is available at the [10x Genomics website](https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/software/cell-ranger/downloads). Human and mouse V(D)J references are available. Download the one that matches the species of your data. 

### Running airrflow
With all the files ready, it's time to run the airrflow pipeline. 

```bash
nextflow run nf-core/airrflow -r 4.2.0 \
-profile docker \
--mode fastq \
--input 10x_sc_raw.tsv \
--library_generation_method sc_10x_genomics \
--reference_10x refdata-cellranger-vdj-GRCh38-alts-ensembl-7.1.0 \
-c resource.config \
--clonal_threshold 0 \    # do not set the clonal_threshold parameter if it's BCR data.
--outdir sc_from_fastq_results
```

Of course you can wrap all your code in a bash file. We prepared one for you and it's available [here](sample_data_code/airrflow_sc_from_fastq.sh).
With the bash file, it's easy to run the pipeline with a single-line command. 

```bash
bash airrflow_sc_from_fastq.sh
```

## Understanding the results

Explanation of the analysis steps of the pipeline and where to find the results. Point to output documentation for specific steps if necessary.

## Including lineage tree computation

Re-run with --lineage_tree parameter using -resume as example.

## Downstream analysis

Downstream analysis can be performed from the AIRR repertoires. Provide one example and links to the Immcantation single-cell tutorial.
